http://JUDIS.NIC.IN SUPREME COURT OF INDIA Page 1 of 3
PETITIONER:
STATE OF HARYANA
Vs.
RESPONDENT:
PALA & ORS.
DATE OF JUDGMENT: 29/01/1996
BENCH:
RAMASWAMY, K.
BENCH:
RAMASWAMY, K.
G.B. PATTANAIK (J)
CITATION:
JT 1996 (2) 416 1996 SCALE (2)179
ACT:
HEADNOTE:
JUDGMENT:
O R D E R
Leave granted.
We have heard the counsel on both sides. The facts are
that in the evening of December 6, 1989, the deceased Rati
Ram, who was Lambardar of the village, had gone on stroll
outside the village. While he was coming at about 8.30 p.m.,
the appellants emerged from their house and each of them
having been armed with massals, A-1 had attacked the
deceased when he came in front of their house, on the head
and hit him three times on different parts. When the
deceased had fallen, A-2 again beaten him thrice on chest,
abdomen and other parts of the body. PW-6 and 7, the son and
brother of the deceased, who were coming in search of him
had witnessed the occurrence. When PW-7 raised the cry, the
accused had gone in and went away. The deceased was taken to
the hospital. He died five days thereafter. The doctor, PW-
9, R.M. Singh, conducted autopsy. He noted seven injuries
and injury nos.2 and 3 were head injuries. Injury No.2 was a
lacerated wound which was inflicted on the right mastoid
region of size of 4 x 1 cm. It was irregular in shape.
According to the doctor, the cause of the death was due to
septicemia resulted as a result of head-injury and was
sufficient to cause death in ordinary course of nature. All
the injuries were ante/mortem in nature and were sufficient
to cause death in the ordinary course of nature. He had
stated that "Septicasemie is the direct result of the head-
injury. This not a disease. In other words, head injury is
the cause of death. The injuries found on the person of the
deceased could be caused by musals Ex.P-1 and P-2." In the
cross-examination, he stated that "Septicaemia has no
relation with bleeding. It is incorrect to suggest that
injuries in this case are not sufficient to cause death in
the ordinary course of nature. The Sessions Court convicted
the respondents, applying clause thirdly of Section 300 IPC,
under Section 302 IPC and sentenced them to undergo
imprisonment for life. On appeal, the High Court had appliedhttp://JUDIS.NIC.IN SUPREME COURT OF INDIA Page 2 of 3
exception 4 to Section 300 IPC and converted the offence of
murder into culpable homicide not amounting to murder and
convicted under Section 304 Part II and sentenced them to
undergo imprisonment to the period already undergone and
accordingly got them released. Thus this appeal by special
leave.
It is not a case of a sudden fight upon heat of
passion. The accused bet the deceased taking undue
advantage. Therefore, Shri Mehta, learned senior counsel
appearing for the respondents, fairly and rightly has not
placed his case under Exception 4 to Section 300. On the
other hand he contended that when death was due to
septicasemie, it cannot be referable to the cause of the
death in the ordinary course of nature due to anti mortom
injuries and that, therefore, the offence of murder has not
been made out. In support thereof, he sought to place
reliance on Lyonâ€™s Medical Jurisprudence for India (Tenth
Edition) at page 222. It is stated therein that "Danger to
life depends, primarily, on the amount of hemorrhage, on the
organ wounded, and on the extent of shock; secondarily, on
secondary hemorrhage, on the occurrence of septicaemia,
erysipelas, tetanus, or other complications. In answering
the question whether a wound is dangerous to life, the
danger must be assessed on the probable primary effects of
the injury : Such possibilities as the occurrence of tetanus
or septicaemia, later on, are not to be taken into
consideration." Though the learned counsel had not read the
later part of the opinion, the medical evidence on record do
clearly establish that Septicaemia is not the primary cause
and the death was due to injuries caused to the deceased and
they are sufficient to cause death in the ordinary course of
nature. Septicaemia would, therefore, not be taken into
account.
Clause thirdly of Section 300 IPC envisages that if the
act is done with intention of causing bodily injury to any
person and the bodily injury intended to be inflicted is
sufficient in the ordinary course of nature to cause death,
it would be murder coming under Section 300 IPC and that,
therefore, it would not be a culpable homicide under Section
299 IPC. When the accused emerged from their house and beat
with deadly weapon on the head and other parts of the body
and death occurred as a result of the injuries, it must be
inferred that the attack on vital parts of the body was
intended to be caused with an intention to cause death.
Intention is locked up in the heart of the assailant and the
inference is to be drawn from acts and attending
circumstances.
It is then contended that the respondents had no
intention to cause the death and that in support thereof he
relies upon the judgment of this Court in State of A.P. vs.
Rayavarapu Punnayya [(1976) 4 SCC 382]. The facts therein do
not help the respondents. All the injuries therein though
were not on vital parts, namely, legs and hands of the
deceased, and death ensued due to their cumulative effect,
this Court had applied clause thirdly of Section 300 IPC and
had reversed the contra-finding of the High Court and set
aside the conviction under Section 304 part II and
convicted the accused under Section 302 read with 34 IPC. It
is true that this Court therein in paragraph 39 had observed
that no secondary factor such as gangrene, tetanus etc ,
supervened. In this case, the supervening event of
septimcemia is not of any consequence as pointed out by the
doctor as the death was only on account of head injuries and
other injuries caused to the deceased. It is then contended
that as there is no proof of a particular accused had causedhttp://JUDIS.NIC.IN SUPREME COURT OF INDIA Page 3 of 3
fatal head injury, they are liable only to be convicted
under Section 326 IPC . We find no force. The facts as
narrated above would establish that both the accused shared
common intention to kill the deceased and are liable to
conviction under Section 302 read Section 34 IPC.
The appeal is, therefore, allowed. The judgment of the
High Court is set aside and the accused stand convicted
under Section 302 read with Section 34 IPC. They are
accordingly directed, as held by the trial court, to undergo
the imprisonment for life. They are directed to surrender
themselves forthwith. In case they do not surrender, the
Sessions Judge would forthwith issue warrant of arrest and
have the warrants executed through the concerned police and
report to the registry of this Court of compliance.